# What is Monitoring

**Monitoring** - the process of gathering telemetry data on the operation of IT env to gauge performance and troubleshoot issue

So, if smth wrong, where do you start the debugging process? How long will it take to figure this out?

So what is monitoring in that context? Let's narrow this sort of operational monitoring of computer systems down to four things:

- **Alerting** (Knowing when things are going wrong is usually the most important thing that you want monitoring for. You want the monitoring system to call in a human to take a look.)
- **Debugging** (Now that you have called in a human, they need to investigate to determine the root cause and ultimately resolve whatever the issue is.)
- **Trending** (Alerting and debugging usually happen on time scales on the order of minutes to hours. While less urgent, the ability to see how your systems are being used and changing over time is also useful. Trending can feed into design decisions and processes such as capacity planning.)
- **Plumbing** (When all you have is a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail. At the end of the day all monitoring systems are data processing pipelines. Sometimes it is more convenient to appropriate part of your monitoring system for another purpose, rather than building a bespoke solution. This is not strictly monitoring, but it is common in practice so I like to include it.)

**Monitoring systems**:
- Processing and Storage (accept and store incoming and historical data)
- Visualization (provide visualizations for data)
- Alerting (define and activate alerts)

## The 3 pillars of observability

**Metrics** - Are a numeric representation of data measured over intervals of time.

- Pros (constant overhead, Ideally suited to dashboards, Well-suited for alerting)
- Cons (not as information-rich as logs, cardinality challenges,  scoped to a single system)

**Logs** - An immutable, timestamped record of events that happened over time. We differentiate Transaction logs, Request logs, Applications logs and Debug logs.

- Pros (easy to generate, logs contain more context, highly effective within a single service)
- Cons (performance implications, less suitable for alerting, effective processing at scale requires significant infrastructure)

**Distributed Tracing** - A representation of a series of causally related distributed events that encode the end-to-end request flow through a distributed system

## Key aspects of Alerting

**Notify** - Define situations that make sense to actively manage

**Automate** - Programmatic responses can be triggered based on threshold violations as well.

**Triage** - Distinctions in alert severity depending on the scale of the problem.