# What is Prometheus?

**Prometheus** is an open source, metrics-based monitoring system. Of course, Prometheus is far from the only one of those out there, so what makes it notable?

Prometheus does one thing and it does it well. It has a simple yet powerful data model and a query language that lets you analyse how your applications and infrastructure are performing. It does not try to solve problems outside of the metrics space, leaving those to other more appropriate tools.

A simple text format makes it easy to expose metrics to Prometheus. Other monitoring systems, both open source and commercial, have added support for this format. This allows all of these monitoring systems to focus more on core features, rather than each having to spend time duplicating effort to support every single piece of software a user like you may wish to monitor.

The data model identifies each time series not just with a name, but also with an unordered set of key-value pairs called labels. The PromQL query language allows aggregation across any of these labels, so you can analyse not just per process but also per datacenter and per service or by any other labels that you have defined. These can be graphed in dashboard systems such as Grafana.

# What Prometheus is not?

As a metrics-based system, Prometheus is not suitable for storing event logs or individual events. Nor is it the best choice for high cardinality data, such as email addresses or usernames.

Prometheus is designed for operational monitoring, where small inaccuracies and race conditions due to factors like kernel scheduling and failed scrapes are a fact of life. Prometheus makes tradeoffs and prefers giving you data that is 99.9% correct over your monitoring breaking while waiting for perfect data. Thus in applications involving money or billing, Prometheus should be used with caution.