# Prometheus Instrumentation

The largest payoffs you will get from Prometheus are through instrumenting your own applications using direct instrumentation and a client library. Client libraries are available in a variety of languages, with official client libraries in Go, Python, Java, and Ruby.

## The Counter
**Counters** are the type of metric you will probably use in instrumentation most often. Counters track either the number or size of events. They are mainly used to track how often a particular code path is executed.

```
from prometheus_client import Counter

REQUESTS = Counter('hello_worlds_total',
        'Hello Worlds requested.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        REQUESTS.inc()
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
```

**Counting Exceptions:**
Client libraries provide not just core functionality, but also utilities and methods for common use cases.

```
import random
from prometheus_client import Counter

REQUESTS = Counter('hello_worlds_total',
        'Hello Worlds requested.')
EXCEPTIONS = Counter('hello_world_exceptions_total',
        'Exceptions serving Hello World.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        REQUESTS.inc()
        with EXCEPTIONS.count_exceptions():
          if random.random() < 0.2:
            raise Exception
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
```

**Counting Size:**
Prometheus uses 64-bit floating-point numbers for values so you are not limited to incrementing counters by one. You can in fact increment counters by any non-negative number. This allows you to track the number of records processed, bytes served, or sales in Euros

```
import random
from prometheus_client import Counter

REQUESTS = Counter('hello_worlds_total',
        'Hello Worlds requested.')
SALES = Counter('hello_world_sales_euro_total',
        'Euros made serving Hello World.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        REQUESTS.inc()
        euros = random.random()
        SALES.inc(euros)
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write("Hello World for {} euros.".format(euros).encode())
```

**CAUTION:**
Attempting to increase a counter by a negative number is considered to be a programming error on your part, and will cause an exception to be raised.

## The Gauge
**Gauges** are a snapshot of some current state. While for counters how fast it is increasing is what you care about, for gauges it is the actual value of the gauge. Accordingly, the values can go both up and down. Examples of gauges include: the number of items in a queue, memory usage of a cache, number of active threads, the last time a record was processed, average requests per second in the last minute

**Using Gauges:**
Gauges have three main methods you can use: inc, dec, and set. Similar to the methods on counters, inc and dec default to changing a gauge’s value by one. You can pass an argument with a different value to change by if you want.

```
import time
from prometheus_client import Gauge

INPROGRESS = Gauge('hello_worlds_inprogress',
        'Number of Hello Worlds in progress.')
LAST = Gauge('hello_world_last_time_seconds',
        'The last time a Hello World was served.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        INPROGRESS.inc()
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
        LAST.set(time.time())
        INPROGRESS.dec()

from prometheus_client import Gauge

INPROGRESS = Gauge('hello_worlds_inprogress',
        'Number of Hello Worlds in progress.')
LAST = Gauge('hello_world_last_time_seconds',
        'The last time a Hello World was served.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    @INPROGRESS.track_inprogress()
    def do_GET(self):
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
        LAST.set_to_current_time()
```

## The Summary
Knowing how long your application took to respond to a request or the latency of a backend are vital metrics when you are trying to understand the performance of your systems. Other instrumentation systems offer some form of Timer metric, but Prometheus views things more generically. Just as counters can be incremented by values other than one, you may wish to track things about events other than their latency. For example, in addition to backend latency you may also wish to track the size of the responses you get back.

The primary method of a summary is observe, to which you pass the size of the event. This must be a nonnegative value. Using time.time() you can track latency

```
import time
from prometheus_client import Summary

LATENCY = Summary('hello_world_latency_seconds',
        'Time for a request Hello World.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    def do_GET(self):
        start = time.time()
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
        LATENCY.observe(time.time() - start)

from prometheus_client import Summary

LATENCY = Summary('hello_world_latency_seconds',
        'Time for a request Hello World.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    @LATENCY.time()
    def do_GET(self):
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
```

## The Histogram
A summary will provide the average latency, but what if you want a quantile? Quantiles tell you that a certain proportion of events had a size below a given value. For example, the 0.95 quantile being 300 ms means that 95% of requests took less than 300 ms.

Quantiles are useful when reasoning about actual end-user experience. If a user’s browser makes 20 concurrent requests to your application, then it is the slowest of them that determines the user-visible latency. In this case the 95th percentile captures that latency.

The 95th percentile is the 0.95 quantile. As Prometheus prefers base units, it always uses quantiles, in the same way that ratios are preferred to percentages.

The instrumentation for histograms is the same as for summarys. The observe method allows you to do manual observations, and the time context manager and function decorator allow for easier timings.

```
from prometheus_client import Histogram

LATENCY = Histogram('hello_world_latency_seconds',
        'Time for a request Hello World.')

class MyHandler(http.server.BaseHTTPRequestHandler):
    @LATENCY.time()
    def do_GET(self):
        self.send_response(200)
        self.end_headers()
        self.wfile.write(b"Hello World")
```
This will produce a set of time series with the name hello_world_latency_seconds_bucket, which are a set of counters. A histogram has a set of buckets, such as 1 ms, 10 ms, and 25 ms, that track the number of events that fall into each bucket. The histogram_quantile PromQL function can calculate a quantile from the buckets.

## What Should I Name My Metrics?

The naming of metrics is more of an art than a science. There are some simple rules you can follow to avoid the more obvious pitfalls, and also general guidelines to construct your metric names.

The overall structure of a metric name is generally library_name_unit_suffix.

**Characters**
Prometheus metric names should start with a letter, and can be followed with any number of letters, numbers, and underscores. While [a-zA-Z_:][a-zA-Z0-9_:]* is a regular expression for valid metric names for Prometheus, you should avoid some of the valid values. Do not use colons and underscores at the start of metric names.

**Snake_case**
The convention with Prometheus is to use snake case for metric names; that is, each component of the name should be lowercase and separated by an underscore.

**Metric Suffixes**
The _total, the _count, _sum, and _bucket suffixes are used by the counter, summary, and histogram metrics. Aside from always having a _total suffix on counters, you should avoid putting these suffixes on the end of your metric names to avoid confusion.

**Units**
You should prefer using unprefixed base units such as seconds, bytes, and ratios. This is because Prometheus uses seconds in functions such as time, and it avoids ugliness such as kilomicroseconds. Using only one unit avoids confusion as to whether this particular metric is seconds or milliseconds. To avoid this confusion you should always include the unit of your metric in the name. For example, mymetric_seconds_total for a counter with a unit of seconds.

**Name**
The meat of a metric name is, um, the name. The name of a metric should give someone who has no knowledge of the subsystem the metric is from a good idea of what it means. requests is not very insightful, http_requests is better, and http_requests_authenticated is better again. The metric description can expand further, but often the user will only have the metric name to go on.

You should avoid putting the names of labels that a metric has into a metric’s name because it will be incorrect when that label is aggregated away with PromQL.

**Library**
As metrics names are effectively a global namespace, it is important to both try to avoid collisions between libraries and indicate where a metric is coming from. A metric name is ultimately pointing you to a specific line of code in a specific file in a specific library.

CAUTION
You should not prefix all metric names coming from an application with the name of the application. process_cpu_seconds_​total is process_cpu_seconds_total no matter which application exposes it. The way to distinguish metrics from different applications is with target labels, not metric names.

## Prometheus Labels

**Labels** are key-value pairs associated with time series that, in addition to the metric name, uniquely identify them.

```
http_requests_login_total
http_requests_logout_total
http_requests_adduser_total
http_requests_comment_total
http_requests_view_total

vs

http_requests_total{path="/login"}
http_requests_total{path="/logout"}
http_requests_total{path="/adduser"}
http_requests_total{path="/comment"}
http_requests_total{path="/view"}
```
You can then work with the http_requests_total metric with all its path labels as one. With PromQL you could get an overall aggregated request rate, the rate of just one of the paths, or what proportion each request is of the whole.

You can also have metrics with more than one label. There is no ordering on labels, so you can aggregate by any given label while ignoring the others, or even aggregate by several of the labels at once.

Labels come from two sources, instrumentation labels and target labels. When you are working in PromQL there is no difference between the two, but it’s important to distinguish between them in order to get the most benefits from labels.

**Instrumentation labels**, as the name indicates, come from your instrumentation. They are about things that are known inside your application or library, such as the type of HTTP requests it receives, which databases it talks to, and other internal specifics.

**Target labels** identify a specific monitoring target; that is, a target that Prometheus scrapes. A target label relates more to your architecture and may include which application it is, what datacenter it lives in, if it is in a development or production environment, which team owns it, and of course, which exact instance of the application it is. Target labels are attached by Prometheus as part of the process of scraping metrics.
