# Grafana

When you get an alert or want to check on the current performance of your systems, dashboards will be your first port of call. The expression browser that you have seen up to now is fine for ad hoc graphing and when you need to debug your PromQL, but it’s not designed to be used as a dashboard.

**Data Source**

Grafana uses data sources to fetch information used for graphs. There are a variety of types of data sources supported out of the box, including OpenTSDB, PostgreSQL, and of course, Prometheus. You can have many data sources of the same type, and usually you would have one per Prometheus running. A Grafana dashboard can have graphs from variety of sources, and you can even mix sources in a graph panel.

**Avoiding the Wall of Graphs**

It is not unusual to end up with multiple dashboards per service you run. It is easy for dashboards to gradually get bloated with too many graphs, making it challenging for you to interpret what is actually going on. To mitigate this you should try to avoid dashboards that serve more than one team or purpose, and instead give them a dashboard each.

The more high-level a dashboard is, the fewer rows and panels it should have. A global overview should fit on one screen and be understandable at a distance. Dashboards commonly used for oncall might have a row or two more than that, whereas a dashboard for in-depth performance tuning by experts might run to several screens.

Why do I recommend that you limit the amount of graphs on each of your dashboards? The answer is that every graph, line, and number on a dashboard makes it harder to understand. This is particularly relevant when you are oncall and handling alerts. When you are stressed, need to act quickly, and are possibly only half-awake, having to remember the subtler points of what each graphs on your dashboard mean is not going to aid you in terms of either response time or taking an appropriate action.

**Singlestat Panel** displays the value of a single time series. More recent versions of Grafana can also show a Prometheus label value.

While the Singlestat panel can only display one time series at a time, the **Table panel** allows you to display multiple time series. Table panels tend to require more configuration than other panels, and all the text can look cluttered on your dashboards.

This is fine for demonstration of the basics, but not great when you have hundreds or even tens of machines to monitor. The good news is that you don’t have to create a dashboard for every individual machine. You can use Grafana’s **templating feature**. In the real world you would probably template based on the instance label and display all the network related metrics for one machine at once. You might even have multiple variables for one dashboard. This is how a generic dashboard for Java garbage collection might work: one variable for the job, one for the instance, and one to select which Prometheus data source to use.